---
title: "20)Very Large Cardinals
collection: solutions
type: "Type"
permalink: /jech-solutions/chapter-20
excerpt: ""
---

{ % include commands.html % }

    <a name="ex20.1"></a>
## Exercise 20.1.
<i>Solution.</i> We first prove an intermediate claim:

<b>Claim.</b>. $\kappa$ is regular.

<i>Proof.</i> Suppose $\kappa$ is singular. Then, by taking a cofinal subsequence, the intersection of $\kappa$-sequence of sets in a filter $F$ also belongs to $F$. Thus, $\kappa$-completeness of a filter implies $\kappa^+$-completeness. Consider:

$$
\begin{align*}
F := \lbrace X \subseteq \kappa^+ : \vert \kappa^+ - X\vert  < \kappa^+\rbrace
\end{align*}
$$

It's easy to see that $F$ is a $\kappa$-complete filter on $\kappa^+$, and hence by hypothesis can be extended a $\kappa$-complete, hence $\kappa^+$-complete, ultrafilter on $\kappa^+$. This implies that $\kappa^+$ is measurable, contradicting that every measurable cardinal is a (strong) limit cardinal. 
$\blacksquare$

Let $\Sigma = \lbrace \sigma_\alpha : \alpha < \lambda\rbrace$ be a $\kappa$-satisfiable collection of $\L_{\kappa,\kappa}$ sentences. For each $x \in P_\kappa(\lambda)$, let $M_x$ be a model for all sentences in $\lbrace \sigma_\alpha : \alpha \in x\rbrace$, i.e. $M_x \models \bigwedge_{\alpha \in x} \sigma_\alpha$. Define the filter $F$ on $P_\kappa(\lambda)$ as follows:

$$
\begin{align*}
F := \ss{[P_\kappa(\lambda)]^{\supseteq y} : y \in P_\kappa(\lambda)}, \;\; \text{ where $[A]^{\supseteq X} := \lbrace Y \in A: X \subseteq Y\rbrace$}
\end{align*}
$$

We see that $F$ is $\kappa$-complete - if $\c{[P_\kappa(\lambda)]^{\supseteq y_\beta} : \beta < \delta}$ is a $\delta < \kappa$ collection of sets in $F$ (where $y_\beta \in P_\kappa(\lambda)$), then $\bigcap_{\beta < \delta} [P_\kappa(\lambda)]^{\supseteq y_\beta} = [P_\kappa(\lambda)]^{\supseteq \bigcup_{\beta < \delta} y_\beta}$, and by regularity of $\kappa$ we have that $\bigcup_{\beta < \delta} y_\beta \in P_\kappa(\lambda)$, so $\bigcap_{\beta < \delta} [P_\kappa(\lambda)]^{\supseteq y_\beta} \in F$.

By hypothesis, say $U$ is the $\kappa$-complete ultrafilter extending $F$. Consider the ultraproduct:

$$
\begin{align*}
M := \prod_{x \in P_\kappa(\lambda)} \Ult_U(M_x)
\end{align*}
$$

Then $M$ is a model for the whole $\Sigma$, as for all $\sigma_\alpha \in \Sigma$:

$$
\begin{align*}
M \models \sigma_\alpha &\iff \lbrace x \in P_\kappa(\lambda) : M_x \models \sigma_\alpha\rbrace \in U \\
&\impliedby \lbrace x \in P_\kappa(\lambda) : \alpha \in x\rbrace \in U \\
&\iff [[\lambda]^{\kappa}]^{\supseteq\alpha+1} \in U
\end{align*}
$$

Note that we used \L o\'{s} theorem for the $\L_{\kappa,\kappa}$ language, which one may easily prove using the same technique as that of the original theorem. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.2"></a>
## Exercise 20.2.
<i>Solution.</i> The hint solves the problem. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.3"></a>
## Exercise 20.3.
<i>Solution.</i> Note that we assume implicitly that $\kappa,\lambda$ are both regular cardinals. We may mimic the proof of Lemma 20.2 to obtain the solution here. Let:
<ol>
<li>[(iii)] Suppose $\Sigma$ is a set of sentences in the language of $\L_{\kappa,\omega}$, and $\vert \Sigma\vert  \leq \lambda$. If every subset of $\Sigma$ of size less than $\kappa$ has a model, then $\Sigma$ has a model..</li></ol>
We shall show that (i) $\implies$ (iii) $\implies$ (ii) $\implies$ (i).

<u>(i) $\implies$ (iii):</u> By a bijection we of course have that there exists a fine measure on $P_\kappa(A)$ for any $\vert A\vert  = \lambda$. The (ii) $\implies$ (iii) part of the proof of Lemma 20.2 can be mimic-ed completely.

<u>(iii) $\implies$ (ii):</u> Let $F$ be a $\kappa$-complete filter on $S$ generated $E \subseteq P(S)$, with $\vert E\vert  \leq \lambda$. We consider the $\L_{\kappa,\omega}$-language which has a unary predicate symbol $\dot{X}$ for each $X \subseteq S$, and a constant symbol $c$. Let $\Sigma$ be the set of $\L_{\kappa,\omega}$ consisting of:
<ol>[label={(\alph*)}]
<li> All sentences true in $(S,X)_{X \subseteq S}$.</li>

<li> $\dot{X}(c)$ for all $X \in E$..</li></ol>
Note that (a) is a countable set, and since $\vert E\vert  \leq \lambda$, there are at most $\lambda$ many sentences of the form (b). Therefore, $\vert \Sigma\vert  \leq \lambda$. The $\kappa$-completeness of $F$ ensures that every set of less than $\kappa$ sentences in $\Sigma$ has a model. Thus by (iii), $\Sigma$ has a model $\A = (A,X^{\A},c)_{X \in E}$. Define $U \subseteq P(S)$ by:

$$
\begin{align*}
X \in U \iff \A \models \dot{X}(c)
\end{align*}
$$

One may verify similarly that $U$ is a $\kappa$-complete ultrafilter. To see that $F \subseteq U$, we simply observe that $X \in U$ for all $X \in E$, and since $F$ is generated by $E$, $F \subseteq U$.

<u>(ii) $\implies$ (i):</u> Let $F$ be the filter defined in (20.1). Similar to <a href="https://clementyung.github.io/jech-solutions/chapter-7#ex7.2">Exercise 7.2</a>, one can show that $F$ is the $\kappa$-complete filter generated by $\lbrace \lbrace \alpha\rbrace^\wedge : \alpha < \lambda\rbrace$. Thus $F$ is generated by at most $\lambda$ many sets, so it may be extended to a fine measure by (ii). 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.4"></a>
## Exercise 20.4.
<i>Solution.</i> Let $C \subseteq P_\kappa(\lambda)$ be closed unbounded, and let $j : V \to M$ be the elementary embedding induced by ultrapower by $U$, with $j(\kappa) > \lambda$. Since $C$ is closed unbounded (in particular unbounded), $D = j"(C)$ is a directed subset of $j(C)$, and $\vert D\vert  \leq \vert P_\kappa(\lambda)\vert  = \lambda^{<\kappa}$. Since $j(\kappa)$ is inaccessible in $M$ and $\kappa < \lambda < j(\kappa)$, $j(\kappa) > \lambda^{<\kappa}$. Thus, as $j(C)$ is closed unbounded in $M$, $\bigcup D \in j(C)$ (as $D$ is directed). Now observe that:

$$
\begin{align*}
y \in \bigcup D \iff (\exists x \in C) \, y \in j(x)
\end{align*}
$$

Now $x \in P_\kappa(\lambda)$, $\vert x\vert  < \kappa$ so $j(x) = j"(x)$. Therefore, $y \in j(x)$ iff $y = j(\alpha)$ for some $\alpha \in x$. since $C$ is closed unbounded, clearly $\bigcup C = \lambda$. Therefore, $\bigcup D = j"(\lambda)$, so $j"(\lambda) \in j(C)$, so by Lemma 20.13 $C \in U$. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.5"></a>
## Exercise 20.5.
<i>Solution.</i> The problems statement is false as it stands. Let $M = \Ult_U(V)$. We shall instead show that the transitive collapse of the ultraproduct is $V_\lambda^M$ (therefore the ultraproduct is isomorphic to $V_\lambda^M$). Note that as in (20.23), $\lambda_x$ is the order-type of $x$, and $\lambda$ is represented by the function $x \mapsto \lambda_x$ in $M$.

This statement is simply an application of \L o\'{s} Theorem. Indeed, for all $f : P_\kappa(\lambda) \to V$, we have that:

$$
\begin{align*}
&\iffbreak [f] \in \Ult_U\lbrace (V_{\lambda_x},\in) : x \in P_\kappa(\lambda)\rbrace \\
&\iff \lbrace x \in P_\kappa(\lambda) : f(x) \in V_{\lambda_x}\rbrace \in U \\
&\iff \lbrace x \in P_\kappa(\lambda) : \rank^V(f(x)) < \lambda_x\rbrace \in U \\
&\iff \rank^M([f]) < \lambda \\
&\iff [f] \in V_\lambda^M
\end{align*}
$$
 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.6"></a>
## Exercise 20.6.
<i>Solution.</i> Consider the $\Sigma_1$ formula $\exists y \, \phi(x,y)$, where $\phi$ is quantifier free with $x \in V_\kappa$. Since $\Sigma_1$ formulas are upward absolute, it suffices to show that $V \models \exists y \, \phi(x,y) \implies V_\kappa \models \exists x \, \phi(x)$. By L\"{o}wenheim-Skolem Theorem, let $M \prec V$ such that $\vert M\vert  < \kappa$ and $\TC(\lbrace x\rbrace) \subseteq M$ (as $V_\kappa = H_\kappa$ by <a name="#13#lem13.23.A">Lemma 13.23.A</a>). My Mostowski's Collapsing Theorem, we have that its transitive collapse $\pi(M)$ is elementarily equivalent to $M$, so $\pi(M) \models \exists y \, \phi(x,y)$. Since $\pi(M)$ is transitive and $\vert \pi(M)\vert  < \kappa$, by <a name="#13#lem13.23.A">Lemma 13.23.A</a> we have that $\pi(M) \in V_\kappa$. By upward absoluteness, $V_\kappa \models \exists y \, \phi(x,y)$. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.7"></a>
## Exercise 20.7.
<i>Solution.</i> Let $\exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$ be a formula with $\varphi$ being $\Pi_1$, and $x \in V_\kappa$. If $V_\kappa \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$, then $V_\kappa \models \varphi(x,y)$ for some $y \in V_\kappa$. Since $\kappa$ is inaccessible, by <a href="#ex20.6">Exercise 20.6</a> we have that $V \models \varphi(x,y)$, so $V \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$.

On the other hand, suppose we have $V \models \varphi(x,y)$ for some $y \in V_\lambda$. Since $\kappa$ is supercompact, there exists an elementary embedding $j : V \to M$ such that $j(\kappa) > \lambda$. Then $j(x) = x$, and $y \in M \cap V_{j(\kappa)}$. Since $\varphi$ is $\Pi_1$ and hence downward absolute, we have that $M \cap V_{j(\kappa)} \models \varphi(x,y)$, so $M \cap V_{j(\kappa)} \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$. But since $j(V_\kappa) = M \cap V_{j(\kappa)}$, by elementarity again this implies that $V_\kappa \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.8"></a>
## Exercise 20.8.
<i>Solution.</i> Let $U$ be as in the hint. We first show that $U$ is a normal measure on $P_\kappa(\lambda)$.
<ol>
<li> Obviously $\emptyset \notin U$. We have $j(P_\kappa(\lambda)) = P_{j(\kappa)}(j(\lambda))$, and $\vert j"(\alpha)\vert  = \vert \alpha\vert  < \lambda < j(\kappa)$. Clearly $j"(\alpha) \subseteq j(\lambda)$, so $\lbrace \alpha < \lambda : j"(\alpha) \in j(P_\kappa(\lambda))\rbrace = \lambda \in D$. Hence $P_\kappa(\lambda) \in U$.</li>

<li> <u>Upward Closure:</u> This follows immediately by the fact that $j$ preserves inclusion and $D$ is upward closed..</li>
<li> <u>$\kappa$-Directedness:</u> Let $\lbrace X_\beta : \beta < \mu\rbrace \subseteq U$ where $\mu < \kappa$. Then:

$$
\begin{align*}
\bigcap_{\beta < \mu} X_\beta \in U &\iff \ss{\alpha < \lambda : j"(\alpha) \in j\bb{\bigcap_{\beta < \mu} X_\beta}} \in D \\
&\iff \lbrace \alpha < \lambda : (\forall \beta < \mu) \, j"(\alpha) \in j(X_\beta)\rbrace \in D \\
&\iff \bigcap_{\beta < \mu} \lbrace \alpha < \lambda : j"(\alpha) \in j(X_\beta)\rbrace \in D
\end{align*}
$$

in which the last statement follows from that $D$ is $\kappa$-complete.</li>

<li> <u>Normality:</u> We first show that the measure $U$ is fine. For any $x \in P_\kappa(\lambda)$, we have:<br/>
$$
\begin{align*}
j(\hat{x}) = \lbrace y \in P_{j(\kappa)}(j(\lambda)) : j(x) \subseteq y\rbrace
\end{align*}
$$

Since $\vert x\vert  < \kappa$, $j(x) = j"(x)$. Thus, for all $\alpha < \lambda$ with $\alpha > \sup(x)$, $x \subseteq \alpha$ and thus $j"(x) \subseteq j"(\alpha)$. Therefore, $\lbrace \alpha < \lambda : j"(\alpha) \in j(\hat{x})\rbrace$ has complement of size $<\lambda$, and so must lie in $D$ by $\kappa$-completeness.

We now show normality. Let $f : P_\kappa(\lambda) \to \lambda$ be such that for some $X \in U$ and for all $x \in X$ non-empty, $f(x) \in x$. By elementarity, we have that $(j(f))(x) \in x$ for all $x \in j(X)$. Let $A := \lbrace \alpha < \lambda : j"(\alpha) \in j(X)\rbrace$. Then for all $\alpha \in A$, $(j(f))(j"(\alpha)) \in j"(\alpha)$, so $(j(f))(j"(\alpha)) = j(\beta)$ for some $\beta < \alpha$. We thus may define $g : A \to \lambda$ by stipulating that:

$$
\begin{align*}
g(\alpha) = \beta, \; \text{where $\beta < \alpha$ is such that $(j(f))(j"(\alpha)) = j(\beta)$}
\end{align*}
$$

Then $g$ is regressive on $A$, and since $D$ is normal there exists a $B \subseteq A$, $B \in D$ such that $g$ is constant on $B$. Let $Y := \lbrace j"(\alpha) : \alpha \in B\rbrace$. Then $j(f)$ is constant on $Y$, and since $j$ is one-to-one, $f$ is also constant on $Y$, as desired.</li>
</ol>
We now show that $U$ is not strongly normal. Define a partition $F : [P_\kappa(\lambda)]^2 \to \lbrace 0,1\rbrace$ by stipulating that:

$$
\begin{align*}
F(x,y) :=
\begin{cases}
1, &\text{if $x \subsetneq y$ and $\lambda_x \geq \kappa_y$,  /}
\end{cases}
\end{align*}
$$

% Fix $X \in U$. We have $\lbrace \alpha < \lambda : j"(\alpha) \in j(X)\rbrace$ is unbounded in $\lambda$, and since $\kappa < \lambda$ there exist $\kappa < \alpha < \beta$ such that $j"(\alpha)$ and $j"(\beta)$ are in $j(X)$. Therefore:
% 
$$
\begin{align*}
%     M \models (\exists x,y \in j(X)) \, x \subsetneq y \wedge \otp(x) > \kappa \wedge \otp(y) > \kappa
% \end{align*}
$$

% We first note that:
% 
$$
\begin{align*}
%     M \models \lambda \geq \kappa \iff \lbrace x : \lambda_x \geq \kappa_x\rbrace \in U
% \end{align*}
$$

The first statement is obviously true, so we have $X := \lbrace x : \lambda_x \geq \kappa_x\rbrace \in U$. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.10"></a>
## Exercise 20.10.
If $\kappa$ is extendible then $V_\kappa \prec_{\Sigma_3} V$.

\begin{hint}
Use <a href="#ex20.7">Exercise 20.7</a>, and show that there are arbitrarily large inaccessible $\lambda > \kappa$ such that $V_\kappa \prec V_\lambda$.
\end{hint}

<a name="lem20.10.A"></a>
<b>Lemma 20.10.A.</b> For any ordinal $\lambda$, there does not exist an elementary embedding $j : V_{\lambda+2} \to V_{\lambda+2}$.

<i>Proof.</i> Suppose we have $j : V_{\lambda+2} \to V_{\lambda+2}$. We see that $j(\lambda) \geq \lambda$, and since $j(\lambda) < j(\lambda+1) = \lambda+1$, $j(\lambda) = \lambda$. Thus, $\crit(j) < \delta$. As in the proof of Kunen's Theorem 17.7, let $\kappa_n := j^n(\kappa)$, and let $\delta := \lim_{n \to \infty} \kappa_n$. Then $\delta \leq \lambda$ and $\delta$ satisfies the premise of Lemma 17.8, so there exists $F : \delta^\omega \to \omega$ such that whenever $A$ is a subset of $\delta$ of size $\delta$ and $\gamma < \delta$, there exists some $s \in A^\omega$ such that $F(s) = \gamma$. Then (See <a href="https://clementyung.github.io/jech-solutions/chapter-6#ex6.4">Exercise 6.4</a>):

$$
\begin{align*}
\rank(F) + 1 \leq \rank(\delta^{\delta^\omega}) = \max\lbrace \rank(\delta),\rank(\delta^\omega)\rbrace + 1 = \max\lbrace \delta,\delta + 1\rbrace + 1 = \delta + 2
\end{align*}
$$

Thus, $\rank(F) \leq \delta + 1 \leq \lambda + 1$, so $F \in V_{\lambda+2}$. A similar contradiction to that in Lemma 17.8 can be derived. 
$\blacksquare$

<a name="lem20.10.B"></a>
<b>Lemma 20.10.B.</b> If $\kappa$ is extendible, then for every $\alpha > \kappa$ and $\gamma > \kappa$, there exists an ordinal $\beta$ and an elementary embedding $j : V_\alpha \to V_\beta$ with $\crit(j) = \kappa$, and $j(\kappa) > \gamma$. In other words, elementary embeddings of arbitrarily large $j(\kappa)$ may be chosen.

<i>Proof.</i> Suppose not, so there exists some $\gamma > \kappa$ such that for sufficiently large $\alpha$, if $j : V_\alpha \to V_\beta$ then $j(\kappa) < \gamma$. We may choose $\gamma$ to be the least such ordinal.

We first show that for all $\alpha < \xi < \gamma$ and all $\alpha > \kappa$, there exists a $j : V_\alpha \to V_\beta$ such that $j(\kappa) > \xi$. Suppose not, so we have $\gamma = \xi + 1$ for some $\xi$. Then there exists an unbounded class of $\alpha$ such that there exists $j : V_\alpha \to V_\beta$ with $j(\kappa) = \xi$. Since for any $\zeta < \alpha$, $j\restrictedto V_\zeta : V_\zeta \to V_{j(\zeta)}$ remains an elementary embedding, we have that for all $\alpha > \kappa$, there exists $j : V_\alpha \to V_\beta$ with $j(\kappa) = \xi$. Thus, we fix any $j : V_\alpha \to V_\beta$, $k : V_\beta \to V_\delta$ with $j(\kappa) = k(\kappa) = \xi$. Since $\kappa < \xi < \beta$, we have that $k(\xi) > \xi$. Thus, $k \circ j : V_\alpha \to V_\delta$ is an elementary embedding with $(k \circ j)(\kappa) > \xi$, a contradiction. In particular, we have that $\gamma$ is a limit ordinal.

We next show that if $\beta$ is sufficiently large and $j : V_\beta \to V_\delta$ is an elementary embedding, then $j"(\gamma) \subseteq \gamma$. Otherwise for some $\xi < \gamma$, there exists an unbounded class of $\beta$, and hence all $\beta > \xi$, such that there exists a $j : V_\beta \to V_\delta$ with $j(\xi) \geq \gamma$. Choose $\alpha$ sufficiently large and such that for all $\ell : V_\alpha \to V_\beta$, we have $\ell(\alpha) < \gamma$. By the previous claim, we may also choose $\alpha$ large enough so we can find $k : V_\alpha \to V_\beta$ with $k(\kappa) > \xi$. Then $j \circ k : V_\alpha \to V_\delta$ and $(j \circ k)(\kappa) \geq \gamma$, a contradiction.

We now prove the lemma. Let $\alpha \geq \gamma + 2$ be sufficiently large and $j : V_\alpha \to V_\beta$ such that $j"(\gamma) \subseteq \gamma$. We consider two cases.
<ol>
<li> Suppose $\cf(\gamma) = \omega$. We can show that $j(\gamma) = \gamma$ - indeed, if $\lbrace \alpha_n : n \in \omega\rbrace$ is cofinal in $\gamma$ (in $V$), then $\lbrace j(\alpha_n) : n \in \omega\rbrace$ is cofinal in $j(\gamma)$ (in $M$). Since $j"(\gamma) \subseteq \gamma$, we have that $\lbrace j(\alpha_n) : n \in \omega\rbrace \subseteq \gamma$, so we must have $j(\gamma) = \gamma$.<br/>
In that case, we see that $j\restrictedto V_{\gamma+2} : V_{\gamma+2} \to V_{\gamma+2}$ is an elementary embedding, contradicting <a href="#lem20.10.A">Lemma 20.10.A</a>.</li>

<li> Suppose $\cf(\gamma) > \omega$. Let $\kappa_n := j^n(\kappa)$, and let $\lambda := \lim_{n\to\infty} \kappa_n$. Then $j(\lambda) = \lambda$ (see the proof of Theorem 17.7), and since $\cf(\gamma) > \omega$ we have that $\lambda < \gamma$. Then $j\restrictedto V_{\lambda+2} : V_{\lambda+2} \to V_{\lambda+2}$ is an elementary embedding, contradicting <a href="#lem20.10.A">Lemma 20.10.A</a>..</li></ol> 
$\blacksquare$

<i>Solution.</i> Let $\exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$ be a formula with $\varphi$ being $\Pi_2$, and $x \in V_\kappa$. By <a href="#ex20.7">Exercise 20.7</a> and that every extendible cardinal is supercompact (Theorem 20.4), if $V_\kappa \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$ then $V \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$.

On the other hand, suppose $V \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$. We write $\varphi(x,y) = \forall z \, \psi(x,y,z)$, where $\psi$ is $\Pi_1$. Let $y \in V_\gamma$ such that $V \models \forall z \, \psi(x,y,z)$. Assuming the hint has been shown, fix any inaccessible $\lambda > \max\lbrace \gamma,\kappa\rbrace$ such that $V_\kappa \prec V_\lambda$. For any $z \in V_\lambda$, we have that $V \models \psi(x,y,z)$, so by <a href="#ex20.6">Exercise 20.6</a> we have that $V_\lambda \models \psi(x,y,z)$. Hence $V_\lambda \models \varphi(x,y)$. This implies that $V_\lambda \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$, and since $V_\kappa \prec V_\lambda$ we have that $V_\kappa \models \varphi(x,y)$, as desired.

It remains to prove the hint. But this follows from that if $j : V_\alpha \to V_\beta$ with $\crit(j) = \kappa$, then $j(\kappa)$ is inaccessible (as $\kappa$ is inaccessible), and by <a href="#lem20.10.B">Lemma 20.10.B</a> $j(\kappa)$ may be arbitrarily large. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.11"></a>
## Exercise 20.11.
<i>Solution.</i> Let $P_\kappa^\ast (\lambda) := \lbrace X \subseteq \lambda : \text{order-type}(X) = \kappa\rbrace$. Here, a normal ultrafilter over $P_\kappa^\ast (\lambda)$ takes the same definition as that preceding Lemma 8.23.

<u>$\implies$:</u> The proof in this direction is almost the same as that of Lemma 20.14, but we illustrate the proof for completeness. Suppose $j : V \to M$ and $j(\kappa) = \lambda$, with $M^{j(\kappa)} \subseteq M$. For $X \subseteq \lambda$ such that $\otp(X) = \kappa$, let $U$ be as defined in the hint, which is possible as $M^\lambda \subseteq M$ (so that $\lbrace j(\gamma) : \gamma < \lambda\rbrace \in M$). We shall show that $U$ is a normal $\kappa$-complete ultrafilter.
<ol>
<li> Obviously $\emptyset \notin U$. We have $j(P_\kappa^\ast (\lambda)) = P_{j(\kappa)}^\ast (j(\lambda))$, and $j"(\lambda) \subseteq j(\lambda)$, with $\otp(j"(\lambda)) = \otp(\lambda) = \lambda < j(\kappa)$. Thus $j"(\lambda) \in P_\kappa^\ast (\lambda)$.</li>

<li> <u>Upward Closure:</u> Immediate..</li>
<li> <u>$\kappa$-Directedness:</u> Let $\lbrace X_\beta : \beta < \mu\rbrace \subseteq U$ where $\mu < \kappa$. Then:

$$
\begin{align*}
\bigcap_{\beta < \mu} X_\beta \in U &\iff j"(\lambda) \in j\bb{\bigcap_{\beta < \mu} X_\beta} \\
&\iff j"(\lambda) \in \bigcap_{\beta < \mu} j(X_\beta) \\
&\iff (\forall \beta < \mu) \, j"(\lambda) \in j(X_\beta) \\
&\iff (\forall \beta < \mu) \, X_\beta \in U
\end{align*}
$$

Since the last statement holds, $\bigcap_{\beta < \mu} X_\beta \in U$.</li>

<li> <u>Normality:</u> Let $f : P_\kappa^\ast (\lambda) \to \lambda$ and $X \in U$ be such that $f(x) \in x$ for all non-empty $x \in X$, i.e. $f$ is regressive on $X$. By elementarity, $j(f)$ is regressive on $j(X)$, and since $X \in U$, $j"(\lambda) \in j(X)$. Thus, $(j(f))(j"(\lambda)) \in j"(\lambda)$, so $(j(f))(j"(\lambda)) = j(\gamma)$ for some $\gamma < \lambda$. Thus, $f(x) = \gamma$ for almost all $x$, as desired..</li></ol>

<u>$\impliedby$:</u> Let $U$ be a normal measure on $P_\kappa^\ast (\lambda)$, and let $M := \Ult_U(V)$ and let $j : V \to M$ be the canonical elementary embedding. The normality of $U$ gives us the $P_\kappa^\ast (\lambda)$ analog of Lemma 20.13, and that give $[f],[g] \in M$ we have:

$$
\begin{align*}
[f] = [g] &\iff (j(f))(j"(\lambda)) = (j(g))(j"(\lambda)) \\
[f] \in [g] &\iff (j(f))(j"(\lambda)) \in (j(g))(j"(\lambda))
\end{align*}
$$

and therefore $[f] = (j(f))(j"(\lambda))$. We also have the analog of (20.23), where $\lambda$ is represented by the function $x \mapsto \lambda_x$. Here however, we instead have $\lambda_x = \kappa$ be all $x \in P_\kappa^\ast (\lambda)$, and therefore $j(\kappa) = \lambda$. We also have $j(\gamma) = \gamma$ for all $\gamma < \kappa$ by $\kappa$-completeness of $U$, and since $\lambda > \kappa$ we have $\crit(j) = \kappa$. Finally, the proof of $M^\lambda \subseteq M$ is verbatim to that of Lemma 20.14. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.12"></a>
## Exercise 20.12.
<i>Solution.</i> We expand on the hint. Suppose $\kappa = \mu$. By Lemma 20.27, $V_\mu$ is a model of Vop\v{e}nka's Principle. The proof of Lemma 20.25 shows that there exists an $\alpha < \mu$ such that for all $\lambda < \alpha$, $V_\alpha \models (\text{$\kappa$ is extendible})$ implies $\kappa$ is extendible, and $V_\alpha$ contains an extendible cardinal $\lambda < \alpha$. Thus, $\lambda$ is extendible, hence supercompact, in $V$. Yet $\lambda < \mu$, contradicting minimality of $\mu$.

Suppose $\mu < \kappa$. Let $j : V \to M$ be elementary such that $j(\kappa) = \lambda$ and $M^\lambda \subseteq M$. Let $i : V \to N$ be also elementary such that $i(\mu) > \lambda + 2$ (so $V_{\lambda+2} \subseteq N$ as $N^{\lambda+2} \subseteq N$). If $U$ is a normal measure witnessing the hugeness of $\kappa$ (in $V$), then since $\kappa,U \in N$, and $\kappa < i(\mu)$ we have that:

$$
\begin{align*}
N \models (\text{$\exists$ huge cardinal below $i(\mu)$})
\end{align*}
$$

By elementarity of $i$, this gives:

$$
\begin{align*}
V \models (\text{$\exists$ huge cardinal below $\mu$})
\end{align*}
$$

which contradicts the minimality of $\kappa$. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.13"></a>
## Exercise 20.13.
<i>Solution.</i> We note that since every huge cardinal is measurable (Theorem 17.3), the least huge cardinal is at least the least measurable cardinal. It thus suffices to show that there exist a measurable cardinal below any huge cardinal.

Let $\kappa$ be a huge cardinal. Let $j : V \to M$ be such that $\crit(j) = \kappa$ and $M^{j(\kappa)} \subseteq M$. Now $j(\kappa)$ is inaccessible, and $U \in P(P(\kappa))$, so $U \in M$. Thus, $U$ witnesses the inaccessibility of $\kappa$ in $M$. Since $\kappa < j(\kappa)$, we have that:

$$
\begin{align*}
M \models (\text{$\exists$ measurable cardinal below $j(\kappa)$})
\end{align*}
$$

by elementarity this implies that there exist a measurable cardinal below $\kappa$ in $V$. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.14"></a>
## Exercise 20.14.
<i>Solution.</i> Define a measure $D$ on $\kappa$ by stipulating that for $X \subseteq \kappa$:

$$
\begin{align*}
X \in D \iff \kappa \in j(X)
\end{align*}
$$

As proven in Lemma 17.3 and the remark preceding Lemma 17.5, $D$ is a normal measure. We shall show that $X := \lbrace \alpha < \kappa : \alpha \text{ is $n$-huge}\rbrace \in D$. Indeed, we have that:

$$
\begin{align*}
X = \lbrace \alpha < \kappa : \exists M \, (\exists k : V \to M) \, \crit(k) = \alpha \wedge M^{k^n(\alpha)} \subseteq M\rbrace
\end{align*}
$$

Thus:

$$
\begin{align*}
j(X) = \lbrace \alpha < j(\kappa) : \exists N \, (\exists k : M \to N) \, \crit(k) = \alpha \wedge N^{j(k^n(\alpha))} \subseteq N\rbrace
\end{align*}
$$

But we note that since $\kappa$ is, in particular, $n$-huge, we have $M^{j^n(\kappa)} \subseteq M$, so by elementarity we have that $j(M)^{j^{n+1}(\kappa)} \subseteq j(M)$. Since $j\restrictedto M$ yields an elementary embedding with domain $M$, we have that $\kappa \in j(X)$, so $X \in D$. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.15"></a>
## Exercise 20.15.
<a name="lem20.15.A"></a>
<b>Lemma 20.15.A.</b> Let $\kappa$ be an uncountable cardinal. The following are equivalent:
<ol>
<li> $\kappa$ is $n$-huge.</li>

<li> There is a normal $\kappa$-complete measure $U$ over some $P(\lambda)$ (where fineness normality are defined analogously to paragraph preceding Lemma 20.2, and Definition 20.12), where $\kappa = \lambda_0 < \dots < \lambda_n = \lambda$, such that for all $i < n$:<br/>
$$
\begin{align*}
\lbrace x \in P(\lambda) : \otp(x \cap \lambda_{i+1}) = \lambda_i\rbrace \in U
\end{align*}
$$
</li>
</ol>

<i>Proof.</i> <u>(i) $\implies$ (ii):</u> Let $j : V \to M$ witness the $n$-hugeness of $\kappa$, and let $\lambda_i := j^i(\kappa)$, and $\lambda := \lambda_n$. Define $U$ by stipulating that for all $X \subseteq P(\lambda)$:

$$
\begin{align*}
X \in U \iff j"(\lambda) \in j(X)
\end{align*}
$$

Note that such definition is possible, as the $n$-hugeness of $\kappa$ implies that $M^\lambda \subseteq M$, and therefore $j"(\lambda) \in M$. The proof that $U$ is indeed a normal measure follows very closely to the $\implies$ direction of <a href="#ex20.9">Exercise 20.9</a>. We show that for all $i < n$, $\lbrace x \in P(\lambda) : \otp(x \cap \lambda_{i+1}) = \lambda_i\rbrace \in U$.

We have:

$$
\begin{align*}
&\iffbreak \lbrace x \in P(\lambda) : \otp(x \cap \lambda_{i+1}) = \lambda_i\rbrace \in U \\
&\iff j"(\lambda) \in j\bb{\lbrace x \in P(\lambda) : \otp(x \cap \lambda_{i+1}) = \lambda_i\rbrace} \\
&\iff j"(\lambda) \in \lbrace x \in P(j(\lambda)) : \otp(x \cap j(\lambda_{i+1})) = j(\lambda_i)\rbrace \\
&\iff \otp(j"(\lambda) \cap j(\lambda_{i+1})) = \lambda_{i+1}
\end{align*}
$$

But it's easy to see that $j"(\lambda) \cap j(\lambda_{i+1}) = j"(\lambda_{i+1})$, which has order-type $\lambda_{i+1}$. So we indeed have that $\lbrace x \in P(\lambda) : \otp(x \cap \lambda_{i+1}) = \lambda_i\rbrace \in U$ for all $i < n$.

<u>$\impliedby$:</u> Let $U$ be a normal $\kappa$-complete measure on $P(\lambda)$, let $M := \Ult_U(V)$ and let $j : V \to M$ be the canonical elementary embedding. The normality of $U$ gives us the $P(\lambda)$ analog of Lemma 20.13. This gives us:

$$
\begin{align*}
\lambda_{i+1} = \otp(j"(\lambda) \cap j(\lambda_{i+1})) = [\c{\otp(x \cap \lambda_{i+1}) : x \in P(\lambda)}]_U
\end{align*}
$$

By (ii), we have that for almost all $x \in P(\lambda)$, $\otp(x \cap \lambda_{i+1}) = \lambda_i$. Thus:

$$
\begin{align*}
[\c{\otp(x \cap \lambda_{i+1}) : x \in P(\lambda)}]_U = [\c{\lambda_i : x \in P(\lambda)}]_U = j(\lambda_i)
\end{align*}
$$

Therefore $\lambda = j^n(\kappa)$. Finally, the proof of $M^\lambda \subseteq M$ is verbatim to that of Lemma 20.14. 
$\blacksquare$

<i>Solution.</i> We note that by the formulation of (ii) in <a href="#lem20.15.A">Lemma 20.15.A</a>, we have that the statement "$\kappa$ is $n$-huge" is absolute between $V_\lambda$ and $V$, where $\lambda$ is large enough (to contain the normal measure in (ii)). Let $\kappa_n := j^n(\kappa)$, and fix some $n < \omega$. Define a normal $\kappa$-complete measure $U$ on $P(\kappa_n)$ by stipulating that $X \in U$ iff $j"(\kappa_n) \in j(X)$. This is well-defined, as $\kappa_{n+1} \in V_\lambda$ and $j"(\kappa_n) \subseteq \kappa_{n+1}$, therefore $j"(\kappa_n) \in V_\lambda$. We may proceed with the proof in <a href="#lem20.15.A">Lemma 20.15.A</a> with $\lambda_i = \kappa_i$, and we have that $U$ is a measure satisfying (ii) of <a href="#lem20.15.A">Lemma 20.15.A</a>, so $\kappa$ is $n$-huge. By elementarity, $\kappa_i$ is $n$-huge for all $i < \omega$. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.16"></a>
## Exercise 20.16.
<i>Solution.</i> Suppose $V = L[A]$. Let $j : V \to M$, with critical point $\kappa$, such that $A \in M$. Then $M = L[j(A)] \subseteq L[A] = V$. On the other hand, since $A \in L[j(A)]$, we have that $L[A] \subseteq L[j(A)]$ by <a name="#13#lem13.27.A">Lemma 13.27.A</a>. Thus $L[A] = L[j(A)]$, so there exists a non-trivial elementary embedding $j : L[A] \to L[A]$, contradicting Kunen's Theorem 17.7. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.17"></a>
## Exercise 20.17.
<i>Solution.</i> We may repeat the proof of Lemma 20.19 Corollary 20.20(iii). Then main difference is that if $j : V \to M$, we require $M$ to compute the ultrapowers by the normal measures on $P_\kappa(\lambda)$ correctly. But for this to hold true, it suffices to choose $j$ such that $V^\mu \subseteq M$ for $\mu$ large enough. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.18"></a>
## Exercise 20.18.
If $\kappa$ is strong then $V_\kappa \prec_{\Sigma_2} V$.

\begin{hint}
As in <a href="#ex20.7">Exercise 20.7</a>.
\end{hint}

<a name="lem20.18.A"></a>
<b>Lemma 20.18.A.</b> If $\kappa$ is a strong cardinal, then for all $\lambda \geq \kappa$ and any set $x$, there exists an elementary embedding $j : V \to M$ such that $j(\kappa) > \lambda$ and $x \in M$. Consequently, $\kappa$ is strong iff it is $\lambda$-strong for all $\lambda \geq \kappa$.

<i>Proof.</i> Note that it suffices to replace "$x \in M$" with $V_\lambda \subseteq M$". Fix $\lambda \geq \kappa$, and let $j : V \to M$ be such that $V_{\lambda+1} \subseteq M$. We first note that $\lambda < \sup\lbrace j^n(\kappa) : n < \omega\rbrace$ - otherwise, since $j^n(\kappa) < \lambda$ for all $n$, $\lbrace j^n(\kappa) : n < \omega\rbrace \in V_{\lambda + 1}$, contradicting Kunen's Theorem 17.7 (the proof of Theorem 17.7 shows that if $j : V \to M$ then $\lbrace \kappa_n : n < \omega\rbrace \notin M$, and therefore $M \neq V$).

Let $n < \omega$ such that $\lambda < j^n(\kappa)$. If we can show that $V_\lambda \subseteq M_n := j^n(V)$, then we are done. We do this by induction - the case for $n = 1$ has been done by the choice of $j$. Now suppose $V_\lambda \subseteq M_n$. By considering $j\restrictedto M_n : M_n \to M_{n+1}$, we have that $V_\lambda^{M_n} \subseteq M_{n+1}$. But $V_\lambda^{M_n} = V_\lambda \cap M_n = V_\lambda$, so $V_\lambda \subseteq M_{n+1}$ as desired. 
$\blacksquare$

<i>Solution.</i> Let $\varphi(x,y)$ be a $\Pi_1$ formula, with $x \in V_\kappa$. As in <a href="#ex20.6">Exercise 20.6</a> and <a href="#ex20.7">Exercise 20.7</a>, if $V_\kappa \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$, then the inaccessibility of $\kappa$ implies that $V \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$. Conversely, suppose $V \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$, so $V \models \varphi(x,y)$ for some $y \in V_\lambda$, where $\lambda \geq \kappa$. Let $j : V \to M$, with $\crit(j) = \kappa$, such that $j(\kappa) > \lambda$ (possible by <a href="#lem20.18.A">Lemma 20.18.A</a>) and $V_\lambda \subseteq M$. Then $y \in M \cap V_{j(\kappa)}$, so we may repeat the proof of <a href="#ex20.7">Exercise 20.7</a> to conclude that $V_\kappa \models \exists y \, \varphi(x,y)$. 
$\square$

<a name="ex20.19"></a>
## Exercise 20.19.
<i>Solution.</i> Let $E := \lbrace E_a : a \in [\lambda]^{<\omega}\rbrace$.

<u>$\implies$:</u> Assume the latter hypothesis fails. For $m < \omega$, let $X_m \in E_{a_m}$ such that there exists no $h : \bigcup_{m \in \omega} a_m \to \kappa$ such that $h"(a_m) \in X_m$ for all $m$.

<u>$\impliedby$:</u> Assume the latter hypothesis holds. Suppose for a contradiction that $\Ult_E$ is not well-founded, so there exists $\lbrace z_n : n < \omega\rbrace \subseteq E$ such that $z_{n+1} \in^\ast  z_n$ for all $n$. For each $n$, $z_n = j_{a_n,\infty}([f_n])$ for some $[f_n] \in \Ult_{E_{a_n}}$. By the directedneses of $\lbrace \Ult_{E_a} : a \in [\lambda]^{<\omega}\rbrace$, we may assume $a_n \subseteq a_{n+1}$ for all $n$. Thus, for all $n$ we have:

$$
\begin{align*}
[f_{n+1}]_{E_{a_{n+1}}} \in i_{a_n,a_{n+1}}([f_n]_{E_{a_n}})
\end{align*}
$$

Let $X_{n+1} \in E_{a_{n+1}}$ such that $f_{n+1}(a) \in (f_n \circ \pi_{a_n,a_{n+1}})(a)$ for all $a \in X_{n+1}$. By the latter hypothesis, let $h : \bigcup_{m \in \omega} a_m \to \kappa$ such that $h"(a_m) \in X_m$ for all $m$. Let:

$$
\begin{align*}
W := \lbrace x \in [\kappa]^{<\omega} : (\forall m < \omega) \, \pi_{x}
\end{align*}
$$
 
$\square$