---
title: "1) Axioms of Set Theory - Suggested Solutions to Jech's <i>Set Theory</i>"
chapter: "1) Axioms of Set Theory"
permalink: /jech-solutions/chapter-1
category: solution
---

{% include commands.html %}

<body>
<a name="ex1.1"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.1.</h2>
*Solution.* $\impliedby$ is clear. For $\implies$, suppose $(a,b) = \lbrace \lbrace a\rbrace,\lbrace a,b\rbrace\rbrace = \lbrace \lbrace c\rbrace,\lbrace c,d\rbrace\rbrace = (c,d)$. Then $\lbrace a\rbrace \in \lbrace \lbrace c\rbrace,\lbrace c,d\rbrace\rbrace$, so $\lbrace a\rbrace = \lbrace c\rbrace$ or $\lbrace a\rbrace = \lbrace c,d\rbrace$. We consider two cases.
<ol>
<li> If $c = d$, then either way we have $\lbrace a\rbrace = \lbrace c\rbrace$, so we have $a = c$. We see that in this case, $\lbrace \lbrace a\rbrace,\lbrace a,b\rbrace\rbrace = \lbrace \lbrace c\rbrace\rbrace$. Then $\lbrace a,b\rbrace = \lbrace c\rbrace = \lbrace a\rbrace$, so $\lbrace a,b\rbrace \subseteq \lbrace a\rbrace \implies b = a$. Hence $a = b = c = d$.</li>
<li> If $c \neq d$, then we must have $\lbrace a\rbrace = \lbrace c\rbrace$ and $\lbrace c\rbrace \neq \lbrace c,d\rbrace$. This also implies that $\lbrace a,b\rbrace = \lbrace c,d\rbrace$. Since $a = c$, ($b = c$ or $b = d$) and $c \neq d$, we must have $b = d$.</li>
</ol><p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.2"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.2.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> If such an $X$ exists, then $X \in P(X) \subseteq X$, contradicting Axiom of Regularity (see Page 63 of the textbook).<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.3"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.3.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> Let $Y := \lbrace x \in X : x \subseteq X\rbrace$. Since $X$ is inductive, $\emptyset \in X$ and $\emptyset \subseteq X$ trivially, so $\emptyset \in Y$. Now suppose $x \in Y \subseteq X$. Note that since $X$ is inductive, $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace \in X$. Then $x \subseteq X$, and since $x \in X$ we have $\lbrace x\rbrace \in X$. Thus, $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace \subseteq X$ and hence $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace \in Y$. So $Y$ is indeed inductive.<br/>
<br/>
Since $\boldsymbol{N}$ is the smallest inductive set, it follows that $\boldsymbol{N} = \lbrace x \in \boldsymbol{N} : x \subseteq \boldsymbol{N}\rbrace$, i.e. $\boldsymbol{N}$ is transitive.<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.4"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.4.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> Let $Y := \lbrace x \in X : x \text{ is transitive}\rbrace$. Clearly $\emptyset$ is transitive, so $\emptyset \in Y$. Now suppose $x \in X$ and $x$ is transitive. We wish to show that $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$ is transitive, which would complete the proof.<br/>
<br/>
Let $y \in x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$. If $y \in x$, then $y \subseteq x \subseteq x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$. Otherwise, $y \in \lbrace x\rbrace$ so $y = x$. Then clearly $x \subseteq x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$. Thus $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$ is transitive.<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.5"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.5.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> Clearly $\emptyset$ is transitive and $\emptyset \notin \emptyset$ as $\emptyset$ has no elements. Now suppose $x \in X$. In the proof of <a href="#ex1.4">Exercise 1.4</a> we have already seen that $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$ is transitive. It remains to show that $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace \notin x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$.<br/>
<br/>
Suppose not, so $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace \in x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$. We consider two cases. If $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace \in x$, then since $x$ is transitive, $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace \subseteq x$. In particular, $x \in x$, a contradiction. Otherwise, we have $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace \in \lbrace x\rbrace$, i.e. $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace = x$. But this also implies that $x \in x$, a contradiction.<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.6"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.6.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> Clearly $\emptyset$ is transitive and since it has no non-empty subset, the second requirement holds trivially. Now suppose $x$ is transitive and every non-empty $z \subseteq x$ has an $\in$-minimal element. In the proof of <a href="#ex1.4">Exercise 1.4</a> we have already seen that $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$ is transitive.<br/>
<br/>
Let $z \subseteq x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$ be non-empty. We consider two cases. If $z \subseteq x$, then by induction hypothesis on $x$ we have that $z$ has an $\in$-minimal element. Otherwise, we have $z = z' \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$ for some $z' \subseteq x$. Let $t \in z'$ be $\in$-minimal in $z'$. If $t$ is $\in$-minimal in $z$, then we're done. Otherwise, we must have $x \in t$. Since $t \in x$ and $x$ is transitive, we have that $x \in x$. This means that $t$ is not $\in$-minimal in $z'$, a contradiction.<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.7"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.7.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> Let $n \in X$. Then $X \cap n \subseteq n$, and by <a href="#ex1.6">Exercise 1.6</a> we have that $X \cap n$ has a $\in$-minimal element. Let $m \in X \cap n$ be such a $\in$-minimal element. We shall show that $m$ is the $\in$-minimal element in $X$.<br/>
<br/>
Suppose not, so there exists a $m' \in X$ such that $m' \in m$. By <a href="#ex1.3">Exercise 1.3</a>, we have that $m = \lbrace p \in \boldsymbol{N} : p \in m\rbrace$. Since $m \in n$, by the same Exercise we have $p \in n$. Thus, $m' \in X \cap n$, so $m$ is not $\in$-minimal in $X \cap n$, a contradiction.<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.8"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.8.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> $\emptyset$ is in the set by definition, and if $x$ is in the set then $x \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$ is in the set by definition (precisely because $x$ is in the set).<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.9"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.9.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> This follows from that $\boldsymbol{N}$ is inductive and <a href="#ex1.8">Exercise 1.8</a>.<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.10"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.10.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> Let $A := \lbrace n \in \boldsymbol{N} : n \text{ is T-finite}\rbrace$. Clearly $0 = \emptyset \in A$ as it is vacuously T-finite. Suppose $n$ is T-finite. We shall show that $n + 1$ has $n$ as its $\subseteq$-maximal element, and is hence T-finite. Let $m \in n + 1 = n \cup \lbrace n\rbrace$. If $m \in \lbrace n\rbrace$, then $m = n$ so $m \subseteq n \cup \lbrace n\rbrace$ immediately. If $m \in n$, then let $m' \in n$ be its $\subseteq$-maximal element. Since $n$ is transitive by <a href="#ex1.4">Exercise 1.4</a>, we have $m \subseteq m' \subseteq n \subseteq n + 1$. Thus $n + 1$ is T-finite. By induction (<a href="#ex1.9">Exercise 1.9</a>), $A = \boldsymbol{N}$ so every $n \in \boldsymbol{N}$ is T-finite.<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.11"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.11.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> Suppose $\boldsymbol{N}$ is T-finite. Let $n \in \boldsymbol{N}$ be $\subseteq$-maximal. Then $n \cup \lbrace n\rbrace \in \boldsymbol{N}$ and therefore $n \cup \lbrace n\rbrace \subseteq n$. Hence $n \in n$, contradicting <a href="#ex1.4">Exercise 1.4</a>.<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.12"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.12.</h2>
<a name="lem1.12.A"></a><br/>
**Lemma 1.12.A.** Let $X$ be a finite set and suppose $X$ has $n + 1$ elements for some $n \in \boldsymbol{N}$. Then, for any $x_0 \in X$, we have $X - \lbrace x_0\rbrace$ has $n$ elements.<br/>
<br/>
*Proof.* Let $f : X \to n + 1$ be a bijection, and fix $x_0 \in X$. Let $x' = f^{-1}(n)$. Define $g : X \to X$ by:<br/>
$$
\begin{align*}<br/>
g(x) =<br/>
\begin{cases}<br/>
x_0, &\text{if $x = x'$} \\<br/>
x', &\text{if $x = x_0$} \\<br/>
x, &\text{otherwise}<br/>
\end{cases}<br/>
\end{align*}$$
Then $f \circ g : X \to n + 1$ is a bijection such that $(f \circ g)(x_0) = n$. Then $(f \circ g)\restrictedto X - \lbrace x_0\rbrace : X - \lbrace x_0\rbrace \to n$ is a bijection, as desired.<p align="right">$\blacksquare$</p><br/>
<br/>
<i>Solution.</i> Let $A = \lbrace n \in \boldsymbol{N} : \text{If $X$ has $n$ elements then $X$ is T-finite}\rbrace$. Clearly $0 \in A$ as the empty set is vacuously T-finite. Suppose sets with $n$ elements are T-finite.  Let $X$ be a set with $n + 1$ element, and suppose $X$ is not T-finite. Let $x_0 \in X$, so $X \setminus \lbrace x_0\rbrace$ has $n$ elements by <a href="#lem1.12.A">Lemma 1.12.A</a>. Then by induction hypothesis, $X \setminus \lbrace x_0\rbrace$ is T-finite, so let $x \in X \setminus \lbrace x_0\rbrace$ be an element $\subseteq$-maximal in $X \setminus \lbrace x_0\rbrace$. Since it is not $\subseteq$-maximal in $X$, we must have $x \subsetneq x_0$. But $x_0$ is not $\subseteq$-maximal either, so $x_0 \subsetneq x'$ for some $x' \in X \setminus \lbrace x_0\rbrace$. Then $x \subsetneq x'$, so $x$ is not $\subseteq$-maximal in $X \setminus \lbrace x_0\rbrace$, a contradiction.<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.13"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.13.</h2>
<a name="lem1.13.A"></a><br/>
<b>Lemma 1.13.A.</b> Let $X$ be a finite set and suppose $X$ has $n$ elements for some $n \in \boldsymbol{N}$. Then, for any $x_0 \notin X$, we have $X \cup x_0$ has $n + 1$ elements.<br/>
<br/>
<i>Proof.</i> Let $f : X \to n$ be a bijection, and fix a set $x_0$. Define $g : X \to n + 1$ by:<br/>
$$
\begin{align*}<br/>
g(x) =<br/>
\begin{cases}<br/>
n, &\text{if $x = x_0$} \\<br/>
f(x), &\text{otherwise}<br/>
\end{cases}<br/>
\end{align*}$$
It's easy to see that $g$ is indeed a bijection as desired.<p align="right">$\blacksquare$</p><br/>
<br/>
<i>Solution.</i> Let $S$ be infinite and let $X$ be the set in the hint. Let $u \in X$. Since $u$ is finite and $X$ is infinite, $u \neq X$. Thus, there exists some $x \in X \setminus u$. By <a href="#lem1.13.A">Lemma 1.13.A</a>, $u \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$ has $n + 1$ and is in particular finite, so $u \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$. Then $u \subsetneq u \cup \lbrace x\rbrace$.<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.14"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.14.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> The hint basically solves the problem. If $\varphi(x,p)$ is a property with parameter $p$, then for any $p$ we may define $F := \lbrace (x,x) : \varphi(x,p)\rbrace$ instead.<p align="right">$\square$</p><br/>
<br/>
<a name="ex1.15"></a><br/>
<h2>Exercise 1.15.</h2>
<i>Solution.</i> <u>Axiom of Union:</u> If $X$ is a set, and $Y$ is a set such that $\bigcup X \subseteq Y$, then:<br/>
$$
\begin{align*}<br/>
\bigcup X = \lbrace x \in Y : (\forall u \in x)(\exists v \in X) \, u \in v\rbrace<br/>
\end{align*}$$
<u>Axiom of Power Set:</u> If $X$ is a set, and $Y$ is a set such that $P(X) \subseteq Y$, then:<br/>
$$
\begin{align*}<br/>
P(X) = \lbrace x \in Y : (\forall u \in x) \, u \in X\rbrace<br/>
\end{align*}$$
<u>Axiom schema of Replacement:</u> Let $F$ be a function, and fix a set $X$. Let $Y$ be such that $F(X) \subseteq Y$. Then:<br/>
$$
\begin{align*}<br/>
F(X) = \lbrace x \in Y : (\exists u \in X) \, x = F(u)\rbrace<br/>
\end{align*}$$
Note that if we denote $\varphi(u,x)$ as the formula "$x = F(u)$" then $\varphi$ is a property, so we may indeed apply Axiom Schema of Separation.<p align="right">$\square$</p>
</body>